Microbialites (automicrites) can be interpreted as a product of microbial activity, or alternatively, as a result of carbonate precipitation, brought about by non-living organic substrates (organomineralizations.
The vertical biotic and sedimentary succession displays a general shallowing trend: from the outer carbonate platform with bioclastic limestones containing small boundstone patches (corals, but not pachythecaliines, Lithocodium aggregatum), to the inner platform with rudist biostromes.
Phaceloid pachythe- caliines are only more common in the Upper Jurassic rocks, being particularly diversified in the Tithonian-Lower Berriasian Stramberk Limestone (Czech Republic) and its equivalent in the Polish Outer Carpathians.
Phaceloid (branched, built of parallel corallites, pseudocolonial) pachythecaliine corals were moderately common in the Late Jurassic and locally diversified taxonomically (Tithonian-Lower Berriasian Stramberk Limestone), but were rare during the Cretaceous.
The section consists of five main, lithological units (): ~10 Bioclastic packstone, rarely wackestones and grainstones, containing small, decimetre-scale boundstone patches, with irregular rims, built of small corals and calcified sponges, encrusted by Lithocodium aggregatum and microbial structures with vesicular, ‘bacinellid’ fabric (A, B).
~8 Packstone-dominated, bioclastic limestones with chaetetids, stromatoporoids, subordinately with rudists and small, colonial corals, but without pachythecaliines (D).
Microbialites are common ( B, C, E; see also 3B, C).
A, B - unit 1: bioclastic limestone with small boundstone patches (arrows in A), built of small corals, calcified sponges, Lithocodium aggregatum (B) and ‘bacinellid’, microbial structures.
Microbialites show dense, non-laminated micritic microfabric (A-E, 8A, B), thus at the scale of microstructure can be categorized as pure leiolites.
The crusts are termed here microbialite, but the more inclusive term automicrite can also be applied (see Microbialites in the chapter Palaeoenvironmental interpretation).
Microbialites are “pure”, contain micrometre-scale “sparitic spots” of uncertain origin (small bioclasts?) or incorporate varying amounts of skeletal debris.
Microbialites do not exhibit borings or encrusting microorganisms, either externally or internally, but fine burrowing traces are relatively common (B, C; compare with ).
Microbialite growth generated small cavities, locally with geopetal structures, filled with allochthonous micrite, calcite sparite cement, and rarely small grains (A, 9).
Microbialite growth between skeletal elements (septa, wall, dissepiments) occurred only locally, “closed” interskeletal space, which prevented filling by sediment.
Sponges, both non-rigid and calcified, show differential preservation even in spatially close parts of the same specimen (C, D, E).
In contrast to the lower part of the section at Ru- salya (B), thin crusts of Lithocodium aggregatum (sensu Schlagintweit et al, 2010) and microbial structures with “bacinellid” fabric (sensu Maurin et al, 1985; Schlag- intweit and Bover-Arnal, 2013) with poorly developed vesicular meshwork, are rare (except in samples from Zara- povo) in most samples with pachythecaliines studied (F, G).
Structures similar to and confused with aggre- gatum, recently reinterpreted as entobian borings (see section Lithocodium/Bacinella in the next chapter), associated with boring foraminfer Troglotella incrustans Wernli et Fookes, 1992 (Schmid and Leinfelder, 1996; Schlagintweit, 2012), were not recognized in the limestones studied.
Limestones, similar to those in unit 1, are common in the sedimentary succession of the Emen Formation at the Alexander Stambolijski Dam studied by Minkovska (1996) and by the present authors (unpublished data).
Among Late Jurassic assemblages it was one of the most common, amphiastraeid corals, but except for in the Titho- nian-Lower Berriasian Stramberk Limestone (see below), its record from the Lower Cretaceous is rar In the list of citations on Cretaceous corals, Loser et al (2002) mentioned only two species of Pleurophyllia, and sparse records worldwid A strictly actualistic approach to the palaeoecology of fossil corals cannot be applied, owing to evolutionary changes and the different, environmental preferences of many, modern reef corals ( adaptation to high energy and an oligotrophic regime; see Wood, 1999).
Phaceloid pachythecaliines were common and highly diversified during sedimentation of the Tithonian-Early Berriasian Stramberk Limestone from the Czech Republic (17 genera, 35 species) and Stramberk-type limestones from Poland (see next chapter, section Spatial and temporal proliferation of pachythecaliines).
However, in contrast to pachythecaliine corals from the Emen Formation, those from the Stramberk Limestone are associated with diversified corals and other biota, although short-term stressful events may be difficult to reveal Most of the Late Jurassic coral assemblages were described from the Upper Oxfordian and Kimmeridgian (Leinfelder et al, 2002; Martin-Garin et al, 2012).
In another example, in the Kimmerid- gian to Valanginian, biostromal reefs (similar to the Stram- berk Limestone, with regard to lithofacies; Ivanova et al, 2008) in SW Bulgaria, Roniewicz (2008) recognized diversified coral communities (50 genera, 72 species), but only four genera and five pachythecaliine species.
Microbialites A characteristic feature of the bioconstructions analysed are dense, nearly always non-laminated, micritic crusts, occurring on and between skeletal metazoans, as well as within semi-closed microcavities.
Bryozoans, serpulids, rare aggregatum and ‘bacinel- lid’ crusts, sporadically red algae and juvenile rudists directly encrust corals or rudists.
Microbialite growth is favoured by a low accumulation rate, but the growth rate is difficult to estimate, because there are no modern analogues for fossil, reefal microbialites.
Microbialites from cryptic caves of Lizard Island display very low net growth rates of 10 to 15 mm/1000 years (Reitner, 1993).
Dolomite crystals, recognized in the samples from Vis- hovgrad, possibly are restricted to microbialites, which indicates the syngenetic nature of dolomite formation and a possible link with microbial activity or organomineralizations.
Lithocodium/Bacinella Lithocodium aggregatum and associated, microbial structures, with a ‘bacinellid’ fabric (“Bacinella irregularis”) are an important issue in palaeoenvironmental interpretation of Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous shallow water limestones.
Lithocodium aggrega- tum Elliot, 1956 was variously interpreted, among others as algae, calcimicrobes or encrusting foraminifera, while Baci- nella irregularis Radoicic, 1959 was mostly interpreted as microbial structures.
, Lithocodium-like entobian borings and “bacinellid” structures in the Late Ju- rassic-earliest Creataceous, coral-microbialite reefs are commonly interpreted as an indicator of shallow-water, although data from the literature indicate that aggregatums.
During the mid-Cretaceous time, in particular in the Early Aptian, a local “bloom” of so-called “Lithocodium-Baci- nella” facies (a descriptive term) occurred (Immenhauser et al, 2005; Huck et al, 2010).
It is assumed that the Aptian “Lithocodium-Bacinella” facies show a more complex, biotic pattern, controlled by fluctuating nutrient levels, sea-water alkalinity, elevated seawater temperatures, seawater acidification and low sedimentation rates, superimposed on global perturbations of neritic ecosystems (Neuweiler and Reitner, 1992; Immenhauser et al, 2005; Huck et al, 2010; Rameil et al, 2010; Bover-Arnal et al, 2011; Huck et al, 2012).
the paleoenvironmental significance of Lithocodium aggregatum occurrences must be carefully viewed in each case study”.
Lithocodium and ‘baci- nellid’ structures are moderately common in unit 1 at Ru- salya.
By comparison with the corals studied, highly diversified, phaceloid pachythecaliines, known from the Tithonian-Lower Berriasian Stramberk Limestone and Stramberk-type limestones (Czech Republic, Poland), are associated with diversified corals and other biota, including phototrophic/oligotrophic microorganims.
A similar co-occurence of five pachythecaliine families is known from the Tithonian- Lower Berriasian Stramberk Limestone (Czech Republic) and its equivalent in the Polish Outer Carpathians.
However, they are highly diversified and abundant (and largely phaceloid) in the Tithonian- Lower Berriasian Stramberk Limestone in Czech Republic, Outer Carpathians (17 genera, 35 species; Ogilvie, 1897; Geyer, 1955; Eliasova, 1974, 1975, 1976a, b, 1978) and in pebbles/boulders (so called exotics) of the Stramberk-type limestones from Poland (14 genera, 22 species; Ogilvie, 1897; Geyer, 1955; Morycowa, 1964b, 1974; Kolodziej, 1995, 2003).
In most papers on corals from the Stramberk Limestone, the age was determined as Tithonian (see Vasi'cek and Skupien, 2004 for references).
For the reasons mentioned above, corals from the Stramberk Limestone are usually recorded in the literature and databases as Jurassic, not Cretaceous fauna.
In contrast to other pachythecaliines, the phaceloid growth form is rare in Heterocoeniida The systematic position of phaceloid genera Cuneiphyllia (one species; Eliasova, 1978) and Pachythecophyllia (one species; Kolodziej, 2003) from the Stram- berk Limestone and Stramberk-type limestones respectively, originally attributed to the Heterocoeniidae, appears to be problematic, but certainly they represent pachythecaliines.
Lithocodium aggregatum (possibly chlorophycean alga) and microbial, ‘bacinellid’ structures are rare, although they are common in many other coral-bearing limestones of the Lovech Urgonian Group.
Dolomite, recognized in the microbialites (Vishovgrad site), is interpreted as resulting from precipitation, linked to microbial activity or organomineralizations.
They are only more common in the Tithonian- Lower Berriasian Stramberk Limestone (Czech Republic) and its equivalent in the Polish Carpathians.
